---
layout: default
title: "Science, Art, and Reconciliation of the Two Schools of Thought"
author: "Nhật &#8220;William&#8221; Phạm"
date: "2023-09-23"
---

Humanity never stops looking for answers; of course, it never stops looking for questions to answer, either. Using this weird machine -- which we call a brain -- in the contraption -- which we call a skull -- we seek for every single possible way to explain the world around us. People looked towards the stars and asked themselves, "What are those? What do they mean?" People also observed many things on the ground and asked themselves, "Why does this behave the way it does?" At some point, we turned to each other and asked, "What is this life, *really*? What is the meaning of life? How can we explain our experiences and interactions with the world around us?"

Throughout history, multitude of great minds has attempted to answer those many questions. As such, schools of thoughts were established, and each school explains (or attempts to do so) in various ways. For instance, art elevates us using imagination, the manipulation of language, the many combinations of sounds and tones, and visual materials -- all to give us multiple sensations and ways to voice and listen to our feelings and ideals. Meanwhile, science uses curiosity and methodologies to perform experiments to find the most suitable explanations for various physical phenomena -- most represented by systems of symbols and equations. However, we quickly find that many of these schools of thought seem never to be able to coexist. One school fought one another: Art rejected science because "it is the bane of imagination", and the science hate both art because none of its practices is about the physical reality.

Reconciling art and science may seem like mixing oil and water, but is it truly impossible? It all depends on the way we look at how art and science behave and cooperate, regardless of how strange it may be. There are ways which allow art and science to attempt to use the great power of knowledge to answer humanity’s burning questions and advance cultures and civilisations.

We shall start by viewing how mankind has treated art and science throughout the stretch of history, and *The Library of Babel* by Jorge Luis Borges can tell us about how we perceive new knowledge and experiences. In the story (and it sounds mildly unfair to call it a "story"), the universe is the Library "composed of an indefinite and perhaps infinite number of hexagonal galleries" (Borges 51). These galleries contain all knowledge both known and unknown to mankind, and the narrator, like everyone else in the Library, has spent his time in search of a "catalogue of catalogues". The Library contains all information which can exist in the universe, and in it, no book is identical to another. Many people have visited the Library, and many people have left it (i.e., they died). Many lived for it, and many killed themselves for it. While they are there, some seek knowledge from the books, some seek to destroy galleries, some tried to decipher the meaning of all books and galleries, and some tried to get to see the ultimate librarian. Yet, despite everything that has happened to the Library of Babel, our narrator concluded, "I suspect that the human species – the unique species – is about to be extinguished, but the Library will endure: illuminated, solitary, infinite, perfectly motionless, equipped with precious volumes, useless, incorruptible, secret" (Borges 51).

In the Library of Babel, everything which has been, is being, will be, and has never been said or created is contained in some books in some galleries in some sections; all knowledge, all emotions, all promises, all intentions, all novels, all poems, and everything else is contained *somewhere*. It is interesting to see how we humans see the world and the universe: The universe holds the very meaning of our existence, so no wonder some people were seeking and even dying for even a glimpse of what could be (or could have been) "the meaning of life", and people became insane and even suicidal in their pursuit. At the same time, many of the Library’s content were destroyed by many people; this is similar to when authorities -- be they religious, political, or cultural -- destroy what they deemed heretical or dangerous; many also have died in the hands of those authorities, and mankind had also lost some of the knowledge it gained from studying the Library. Knowledge is a controversial thing, and oftentimes, knowing "the wrong thing" tended to change the status quo -- whatever that may be -- and even the way everyone saw and interpreted the world around them. This also tended to be the reason why art and science were prosecuted; powerful people and organisations like monarchs and churches were the one to tell people what and how to think at the olden times, and they had the power to prosecute whomever they deemed dangerous.

The Library of Babel -- the universe -- has power which transcends all individuals and authorities, but it is up to us, the people, to figure out what to do with and how to respond to what we may find in the Library. The power of the Library leads us towards innovation or towards destruction, and nothing can topple such power. "The Library will endure" (Borges 51). Therefore, to its readers, the Library of Babel is seen as an unstoppable force; it is a set of keys which can unlock many doors -- pleasant ones, questionable ones, destructive ones, etc. -- and those who use those keys can wield unprecedented abilities.

But how is knowledge used? We know how powerful that arbitrary library called the Library of Babel can be and what it can do, but what about the thing with art and science? What about reconciling art and science? Don’t you worry; we will get there.

The thing about art and science is that if we think a little bit harder, they are basically just two different ways to interpret the world: There is an artistic way to interpret the world, and there is a scientific way to interpret the same world. If art and science ultimately strive to reach the same goal -- to gain a deeper understanding of the world -- then contrary to popular belief, those two schools of thought must be reconcilable! Many poets has attempted to incorporate science into poetry like how A.R. Ammons wonderfully describes what makes an ordinary goldfinch chirp the way it does in *Mechanism*, or to comment on the status quo of society like how Anna Lætitia Barbauld used the advancement of science and technology to convey feminism via how, despite women being confined in the kitchen, innovation had given them ice tea for summer in *Inscription for an Ice-House*, a beautiful irony which technological innovation allowed to flourish. In this way, poetry – and art in general – is a form of unbound knowledge, where ideas flows and emotions burst. It is where people find the meaning of their existence, a different perspective to the world, a new method to navigate life, and a way to give appreciation to what science has given them.

On the other hand, many scientists have instructed fellow scientists and students to always have a creative mind when exploring their fields. The concept of "the creative scientist", as Dr. Arthur Winfree said in *The Scientist as Poet* for *The Cornell Engineer* when he was still a student in November 1964, is necessary. To Dr. Winfree,"“We get [the new principles needed to expand our appreciation of Reality] by induction, imagination, and poetic insight" (Winfree 2).

> "The poet and the scientist are both, in essence, striving to really see the world, not only in its culturally and verbally imposed aspects, but in its immediacy and its inexhaustible wonderment. […] Both are attempting new and [unheard-of] exploits in perception, both are exploring that terra incognita of mind where anything may be discovered by the man who can open his eyes wide enough to see it" (Winfree 1).
>
> --Arthur Winfree, *The Scientist as Poet*, November 1964

Without a creative mind, no scientist can discover anything new, and no one can reach beyond what is already known. Beauty is on the individual to grasp, and knowledge is only made when scientists are brave enough to venture into the creative wilderness. The mindset of a poet allows a scientist to make new discoveries. In his address in 1880 at the opening of Mason College, Birmingham, England (now the University of Birmingham), Thomas Henry Huxley emphasises that even though he believed the university should fully commit to scientific education,

> "Nevertheless, I am the last person to question the importance of genuine literary  education, or to suppose that intellectual culture can be complete without it. An exclusively scientific training will bring about a mental twist as surely as an exclusive literary training. The value of the cargo does not compensate for a ship’s being out of trim; and I should be very sorry to think that the Scientific College would turn none but lop-sided men" (Huxley 9).
>
> --Thomas Henry Huxley, *Science and Culture*, 1880

Therefore, it is necessary that no scientist should live without understanding and adapting the artistic mind, and no artist should live without an appreciation to the world around them through scientific interpretations; Huxley certainly did not want the university to be the place to create "lop-sided men". Both art and science paint a more complete picture to the world and universe around us, both strive to understand the reasons why and for what purpose mankind is here, and both are necessary for mankind not just to survive but also to form a deeper connection to the ground below and the sky above. Cultures henceforth become more enriched. That is how art and science coincide, and that is how artistic knowledge and scientific knowledge can and should be used.

To end this essay, here is one last quote from The Library of Babel regarding the list of adjectives the narrator used to describe the Library:

> "I have just written the word “infinite.” I have not interpolated this adjective out of rhetorical habit; I say that it is not illogical to think that the world is infinite. […] I venture to suggest this solution to the ancient problem: The Library is unlimited and cyclical. If an eternal traveler were to cross it in any direction, after centuries he would see that the same volumes were repeated in the same disorder (which, thus repeated, would be an order: the Order). My solitude is gladdened by this elegant hope."
>
> --Jorge Luis Borges, *The Library of Babel*, translated by J.E.l.

In the pursuit of finding the truth -- whatever it may be -- all knowledge is necessary to creak the code, and art and science are the hints the librarian – whoever he may be – leaves us. Mankind can surely answer the questions it created: "What are those? What do they mean? Why does this behave the way it does? What is this life, *really*? What is the meaning of life? How can we explain our experiences and interactions with the world around us?" Like mentioned before, if art and science aim for the same bullseye, then we travellers should utilise them as an imperfect yet unified sextant to navigate ourselves towards the truth. It is a difficult endeavour, but it is a worthwhile one, nonetheless.
